README.markdown, before:

cl-avm-http-helpers
===================

This project contains different utilities to handle some tricky aspects
of the HTTP protocol.

Also it contains helper to publish templates compiled via 
[cl-closure-template](https://github.com/archimag/cl-closure-template).

> IMPORTANT NOTE:
> Some library parts are accidentally bound to the [Hunchentoot](http://weitz.de/hunchentoot/).
> This should be fixed via providing some generic mechanism or Hunchentoot 
> availability detection.

HTTP Headers
------------

At this time library provides handling of the `Accept` header and 
conditional execution with `Last-Modified`/`If-Modified-Since`/`If-Unmodified-Since`.

### `Accept` Header

A typical usage looks like:

    (dispatch-mime-type header
      ("text/html"
        ; HTML generator
       )
      ("text/plain"
        ; Plain text generator
       )
      (otherwise
        ; Return `Not Acceptable` error
       ))

All MIME types from cases are got q-value from `Accept` header. The type
with the biggest q-value will be selected. Q-values to types assigned from
the most specific media ranges from teh `Accept` header.

If any two media has got the same q-value, first one will be selected. 
For example, if "text/html" and "text/plain" have q=1.0, in the sample above 
"text/html" will be selected.

Media parameters are supported in the header and in the cases are supported. 
If the header doesn't contain media range with parameters from case label _but_
media range _without_ parameters matches, media range from case label will get
q-value from media range with parameters. For example:

    (dispatch-mime-type "text/html;level=0.7,text/html;q=0.8,*/*;q=0.1"
      ("text/plain"
       "text/plain")
      ("text/html;level=2"
       "text/html;level=2")
      ("text/html"
       "text/html")
      ("text/html;level=1"
       "text/html;level=1")
      (otherwise
       nil))

"text/html;level=2" will be selected because of inheritance of q-value from "text/html"
(0.8).

This facility is completely unbound with Hunchentoot. So, client needs to provide value of
the `Accept` header.

If it is possible for clients to receive different MIME types with the (for example, image
as PNG to display initial picture or image as BASE64 for Ajax/Web 2.0 application to update
it), the header `Vary` *must* be set to at least `Accept`. This informs all caches that 
content depends on the supplied `Accept` header.

### Conditional Processing

HTTP 1.1 offers mechanism to control caching. In the simplest version it consists of 
`Last-Modified` response header and `If-Modified-Since`/`If-Unmodified-Since` request 
headers.

The library provides 2 pairs of macros: "when-modified"/"when-modified*" and 
"unless-modified"/"unless-modified*".

The macros "when-modified*" and "unless-modified*" are generic ones. They receive
resource time stamp and implementation identifier.

The macros "when-modified" and "unless-modified" are designed for regular usage. They
receive resource time stamp as Common Lisp universal time. The body of the macro invocation
is executed if comparison of the time stamp to the header's value is succeeded. The 
implementation is auto-detected. The first one is from `*default-http-implementation*` variable.
If it is NIL the `*features*` is checked for Hunchentoot.

If the body of the macro is executed, the header `Last-Modified` is set to the representation
of the provided time stamp.

For example:

    (when-modified (file-write-date path)
      (generate-contents path))

Closure Template Publishing
---------------------------

Templates are published via [RESTAS](https://github.com/archimag/restas) after 
compilation to the [RequireJS](http://requirejs.org/) module format.

> IMPORTANT NOTE:
> This library is bound to the Hunchentoot server implementation because of RESTAS usage.

Component is implemented in `cl-avm-requirejs-publisher` system and can be used as module.

For example:

    (restas:mount-module symbol (#:cl-avm-requirejs-publisher)
      (cl-avm-requirejs-publisher:*source-dir* #p"/path/to/templates/"))

Usable parameters:
- `*source-dir*` - directory that contains templates to be published; required;
- `*extension*` - template file extension which replaces "js" extension in request,
  by default "tmpl".

Commit message:

Add automatic header access to the Accept header handling

README.markdown, after:

cl-avm-http-helpers
===================

This project contains different utilities to handle some tricky aspects
of the HTTP protocol.

Also it contains helper to publish templates compiled via 
[cl-closure-template](https://github.com/archimag/cl-closure-template).

> IMPORTANT NOTE:
> Some library parts are accidentally bound to the [Hunchentoot](http://weitz.de/hunchentoot/).
> This should be fixed via providing some generic mechanism or Hunchentoot 
> availability detection.

HTTP Headers
------------

At this time library provides handling of the `Accept` header and 
conditional execution with `Last-Modified`/`If-Modified-Since`/`If-Unmodified-Since`.

### `Accept` Header

A typical usage looks like:

    (dispatch-mime-type
      ("text/html"
        ; HTML generator
       )
      ("text/plain"
        ; Plain text generator
       )
      (otherwise
        ; Return `Not Acceptable` error
       ))

All MIME types from cases are got q-value from `Accept` header. The type
with the biggest q-value will be selected. Q-values to types assigned from
the most specific media ranges from teh `Accept` header.

If any two media has got the same q-value, first one will be selected. 
For example, if "text/html" and "text/plain" have q=1.0, in the sample above 
"text/html" will be selected.

Media parameters are supported in the header and in the cases are supported. 
If the header doesn't contain media range with parameters from case label _but_
media range _without_ parameters matches, media range from case label will get
q-value from media range with parameters. For example:

    When `Accept` header contains "text/html;level=0.7,text/html;q=0.8,*/*;q=0.1"

    (dispatch-mime-type
      ("text/plain"
       "text/plain")
      ("text/html;level=2"
       "text/html;level=2")
      ("text/html"
       "text/html")
      ("text/html;level=1"
       "text/html;level=1")
      (otherwise
       nil))

"text/html;level=2" will be selected because of inheritance of q-value from "text/html"
(0.8).

There are 2 versions of the macros is available. `dispatch-mime-type` automatically selects
HTTP server implementation. `dispatch-mime-type*` accepts additional argument with the HTTP
implementation identifier.

If it is possible for clients to receive different MIME types with the (for example, image
as PNG to display initial picture or image as BASE64 for Ajax/Web 2.0 application to update
it), the header `Vary` *must* be set to at least `Accept`. This informs all caches that 
content depends on the supplied `Accept` header. The macros perform this task automatically.
But if handling code requires additional data in the `Vary` header it should set it manually 
with `Accept` inside.

### Conditional Processing

HTTP 1.1 offers mechanism to control caching. In the simplest version it consists of 
`Last-Modified` response header and `If-Modified-Since`/`If-Unmodified-Since` request 
headers.

The library provides 2 pairs of macros: "when-modified"/"when-modified*" and 
"unless-modified"/"unless-modified*".

The macros "when-modified*" and "unless-modified*" are generic ones. They receive
resource time stamp and implementation identifier.

The macros "when-modified" and "unless-modified" are designed for regular usage. They
receive resource time stamp as Common Lisp universal time. The body of the macro invocation
is executed if comparison of the time stamp to the header's value is succeeded. The 
implementation is auto-detected. The first one is from `*default-http-implementation*` variable.
If it is NIL the `*features*` is checked for Hunchentoot.

If the body of the macro is executed, the header `Last-Modified` is set to the representation
of the provided time stamp.

For example:

    (when-modified (file-write-date path)
      (generate-contents path))

Closure Template Publishing
---------------------------

Templates are published via [RESTAS](https://github.com/archimag/restas) after 
compilation to the [RequireJS](http://requirejs.org/) module format.

> IMPORTANT NOTE:
> This library is bound to the Hunchentoot server implementation because of RESTAS usage.

Component is implemented in `cl-avm-requirejs-publisher` system and can be used as module.

For example:

    (restas:mount-module symbol (#:cl-avm-requirejs-publisher)
      (cl-avm-requirejs-publisher:*source-dir* #p"/path/to/templates/"))

Usable parameters:
- `*source-dir*` - directory that contains templates to be published; required;
- `*extension*` - template file extension which replaces "js" extension in request,
  by default "tmpl".
